{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1187\cocoasubrtf340
\cocoascreenfonts1{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww13680\viewh13640\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs40 \cf0 No idea is more provocative in controversies about
\fs24  
\fs40 technology and society than the notion that technical
\fs24  
\fs40 things have political qualities.\
\
Denis Hayes (environmentalist): \'93T\kerning1\expnd4\expndtw20
h\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 e increased
\fs24  
\fs40 deployment of nuclear power facilities must lead society
\fs24  
\fs40 toward authoritarianism. Indeed, safe reliance u\kerning1\expnd4\expndtw20
p\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 on
\fs24  
\fs40 nuclear \kerning1\expnd4\expndtw20
p\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 ower as the principal source of energy may be
\fs24  
\fs40 possible only in a totalitarian state.\'94 \'85\'93dispersed solar
\fs24  
\fs40 sources are more compatible than centralized
\fs24  
\fs40 technologies with social equity, freedom and cultural
\fs24  
\fs40 pluralism.\'94\
\
Scarcely a new invention
\fs24  
\fs40 comes along that someone doesn\'92t proclaim it as the
\fs24  
\fs40 salvation of a free society.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\f1\fs22 \cf0 What matters is not technology itself, but the\
social or economic system in which it is embedded.\
\
but this 
\f0\fs30  suggests that technical 
\i things 
\i0 do not matter at all. Once one has done the detective work necessary to reveal the social origins\'96 power holders behind a particular instance of technological change\'96one will have explained everything of importance.
\fs24 \

\f1\fs22 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs30 \cf0 The theory of technological politics draws attention to the momentum of large-scale sociotechnical systems, to the response of modern societies to certain technological imperatives, and to the ways human ends are powerfully transformed as they are adapted to technical means.
\fs24 \

\fs30 this approach identifies certain technologies as political phenomena in their own right.
\fs24 \
\

\fs30 two ways in which artifacts can contain political properties
\fs24 \

\fs30 First are instances in which the invention, design, or arrangement of a specific technical device or system becomes a way of settling an issue in the affairs of a particular community.
\fs24 \

\fs30 Second are cases of what can be called \'93inherently political technologies,\'94 man-made systems that appear to require or to be strongly compatible with particular kinds of political relationships.
\fs24 \

\fs30 Lewis Mumford says that two traditions of technology, one authoritarian, the other democratic, exist side-by-side in Western history\
\
There are, then, several different directions that arguments of this kind can follow. Are the social conditions predicated said to be required by, or strongly compatible with, the workings of a given technical system? Are those conditions internal to that system or external to it (or both)?
\fs24 \

\fs30 If we examine social patterns that characterize the environments of technical systems, we find certain devices and systems almost invariably linked to specific ways of organizing power and authority.
\fs24 \
\
where are corporations, in the tech or in the political sphere?\
1.- adoption for necessity\
2.- adoption as wish\
esto se puede aplicar en pol\'edtica, empresa, publicidad\'85\
el caso del greempeace action\
el caso de latinoamerica, brasil, venezuela...\
inadverted adoption?\
What is the role of corporations, brands and organizations in the adoption of "democratic technologies? case: companies that are competitive because of free sources. other case, proprietary goods used as free.\
\
is it a danger (that they absorb these movements and use this technologies un market fashion) or an opportunity?\
\
eduardo-->we need and use companies\
\
it's a matter of control, not ethics\
\
voluntary fact checkers (and paid ones)\
David de ugatrte- crisis entr\'e9 red centralized y distribuida. -->existe un shift o una convivencia?\
siguen existiendo los periodistas\'85 y los pol\'edticos?\
economic crisis as a failure of proprietary market systems?\
______________________________________________\
diferencias entre anteriores revoluciones y esta\'85 si es que lo es. quiz\'e1s no sea una revoluci\'f3n pero s\'ed es un cambio de gran calado.\
\
Un modo de entender la actividad humana en un momento hist\'f3rico o \'e1mbito geogr\'e1fico determinados es verla como condicionada por dos esferas, la pol\'edtica y la tecnol\'f3gica. Las decisiones, ideas, motivos, expectativas, certezas, productos y costumbres de una sociedad responden a su organizaci\'f3n del poder y se sustancian en la naturaleza de herramientas de que dispone para modificar el entorno. \
A la esfera pol\'edtica pertenecen las organizaciones sociales e institucionales, las elecciones, los parlamentos, las movilizaciones y en general las actividades o sistemas orientados a defender, cuestionar o modificar el reparto del poder. En la tecnol\'f3gica, adem\'e1s de los instrumentos, m\'e1quinas, hardware y software encontramos los sistemas y actividades dedicadas a crear, mantener y operar esta tecnolog\'eda.\
Para Winner estas esferas no son meros contextos sino fuerzas poderosas que influyen entre s\'ed. El ejemplo obvio de un partido pol\'edtico que utiliza las tecnolog\'edas de la informaci\'f3n para transmitir su mensaje cobra inter\'e9s si consideramos que el propio mensaje est\'e1 condicionado por la naturaleza de esas tecnolog\'edas. En efecto, el coste de una campa\'f1a electoral se sufraga en gran parte con el dinero de las corporaciones due\'f1as de la tecnolog\'eda que permite no s\'f3lo difundir el programa electoral, sino tambi\'e9n cumplirlo.\
Otros ejemplos de interacci\'f3n de ambas esferas son los fondos p\'fablicos destinados a la investigaci\'f3n tecnol\'f3gica, el desarrollo de tecnolog\'eda militar, las leyes de protecci\'f3n de patentes y seguridad nuclear (ver cita de Denis Hayes en Do artofacts have Politics?),  o m\'e1s recientemente el uso de tecnolog\'edas de la informaci\'f3n para el activismo. \
En este sentido cabe preguntarse si estas dos fuerzas pueden coexistir siendo contrarias en naturaleza o si, eventualmente, una provocar\'eda un cambio en la otra. \'bfPuede una pol\'edtica de car\'e1cter abierto y liberal convivir con una tecnolog\'eda cerrada y jerarquizada y autoritaria (o viceversa)? Para Winner la tensi\'f3n entre ambas esferas ser\'eda inestable y tarde o temprano una arrastrar\'eda a la otra\'85 \'bfPero cu\'e1l?\
Nuestra relaci\'f3n con la tecnolog\'eda es de car\'e1cter urgente e irrenunciable (conseguirla es una obligaci\'f3n y una vez conquistada renunciar a ella es impensable) mientras que con la pol\'edtica es aplazable, aspiracional y basada en consideraciones de lo deseable o lo conveniente por encima de lo acuciante. Es l\'f3gico pensar entonces que una sociedad pol\'edticamente abierta con una esfera tecnol\'f3gica cerrada tender\'eda a verse transformada por la presi\'f3n de su tecnosfera, salvo que en su politosfera se produjesen esfuerzos considerables para contrarrestarla.\
Como ejemplo de esta presi\'f3n Winner cita la situaci\'f3n pol\'edtica actual de las ex-rep\'fablicas sovi\'e9ticas. El colapso de la Uni\'f3n Sovi\'e9tica supuso una digresi\'f3n de las esferas pol\'edtica y tecnol\'f3gica de la URRSS antes coincidentes en su car\'e1cter autoritario y centralista. La nueva esfera pol\'edtica abierta y democr\'e1tica podr\'eda estar deterior\'e1ndose por la tensi\'f3n con una tecnosfera heredada.\
Desde este punto de vista, nuestra sociedad estar\'eda abocada a procesos pol\'edticos involutivos. La pol\'edtica, dependiente de la tecnolog\'eda, mutar\'eda lentamente para adaptarse a ella y cada nuevo avance tecnol\'f3gico "liberador" acabar\'eda en manos de los poderosos que lo usar\'edan para aumentar su poder, alimentando as\'ed este ciclo tal como sucedi\'f3 con la radio y la televisi\'f3n (ver Tim Wu - The Master Switch).\
La tecnolog\'eda sin embargo no es inapelable. Existe la posibilidad de cambiarla de modo que se adapte a nuestra visi\'f3n pol\'edtica. Winner llama a esto "Teor\'eda de la compatibilidad" y alej\'e1ndose del puro determinismo tecnol\'f3gico pone en valor las influencias mutuas de tecnolog\'eda y pol\'edtica y resalta la capacidad de las sociedades liberales para crear y mantener tecnolog\'edas alineadas con su pensamiento. \
Las aspiraciones no mercantilistas de parte de la sociedad en lo que respecta a la producci\'f3n cultural y de informaci\'f3n, la colaboraci\'f3n y la asociaci\'f3n han encontrado en internet el marco ideal para su desarrollo al tiempo que las tecnolog\'edas cada vez m\'e1s ub\'edcuas y accesibles han permitido a millones de personas producir y colaborar en asociaciones espor\'e1dicas en torno a intereses comunes (ver Benkley - The Wealth of Networks).\
\
Imagine 2 spheres of human activity\
1 Political sphere(institutional & social, organizations, persons & groups voting, mobilizing, elections\'85.\
2 Techno Sphere. instruments, tech systems, hardware, soft, budding, machines\'85 things needed to guid or operate this techs\
the 2 spheres are connected (politicians that use electronic systems) or research supported by public funds.\
Qest about relations between 2 spheres:\
To what extents are there influences from one to other, or they can coexist if they are opposite. If there is a tension, eventually there will be tendencies to change in one or other did (example, an open society with a closed technosphere)\
the nature of technology is urgent (we must have this) while the political is not (We could\'85)\
Unles there is strong efforts to maintain certain political principles in an open society, it can happen that the political sphere will transform to match the structures of the surrounding technosphere.\
why not do the opposite? we could change the technosphere to match our social idea\
this is called the 
\b theory of compatibility by winner
\b0 . What happens if they're not in harmony.\
How do we protect the politesphere from pressure of technosphere?\
ex of failure of compatibility: Colapse of soviet 91 before it had an authoritarian techno and polit sphere.\
When politics changed, if technology wasn't changed tension builds back to authotitarism in politics, as it is happening now.\
It's not classic determinism as it doesn't say that technology shoes society, but there are negotiations between them.\
__\
In USA technology is always celebrated as freeing & democratizing. The same expectation placed 2day in internet where placed on the radio years ago. same with tv (freedom, set government, education)\
Tim Woo - The master switch (leer)\
\
with internet there might not happen the same as with tv or radio. we have hops that move beyond tech determinism or utopia.\
example: The wealth of networks. before, it costed money to access info. there where, however, non monetary initiatives based on cooperation and no proprietary action. Key features of a healthy information society come from before of the appearance of computers, so somehow they merged.\
network information economy.\
Benkler says this is not tech determinism because we don't need to change, we want to.\
\
Global supply chain management systems are those ofs communication, shipping, warehousing\'85.that get the goods in the stores. creating value\
\
\
\
}